PacketFormat.md, before:

# LoRaMaDoR protocol

This page describes the more technical details of the protocol.

## LoRaMaDoR packet format

A LoRaMaDoR packet is composed by three parts: header, payload and FEC code.
The header contains destination and source callsigns, as well as some 
parameters:

```
Destination<Source:Parameters Payload FEC
```

There shall not be spaces within the header. If there is a payload, it is separated
from the header by a single space. The FEC code is mandatory, and it is specified
in its own section later on.

Stations shall have 4 to 7 octets, shall not start with "Q", and may be suffixed
by an SSID. Special or pseudo-callsigns are: QB (beacon) for automatic broadcast
sent every 10 minutes, QR (beacon of repeater), QC (think "CQ") for human
broadcasting, and QL ("loopback") for debugging/testing.

Parameters are a set of comma-separated list of items, for example:

```
123,A,B=C,D,E=FGH
```

The parameters can be in three formats: naked number, naked key, and key=value.

There shall be one and only one naked number in the parameter list: it is the
packet ID. Together with the source callsign, it uniquely identifies the packet
within the network in a 20-minute time window. This is used to e.g. avoid 
forwarding the same packet twice.

Keys (naked or not) must be composed of capital letters and numbers only, and must start
with a letter. Values may be composed of any characters except those used as delimiters
in the header (space, comma, equal, etc.)

A value can be empty and this should be handled different from a naked key e.g.
in `A=,B`, B is naked while A has a value, which is an empty string. Implementations
should allow for this distinction.

Reserved parameters, added or handled by the core stack:

`PING` asks for an automated `PONG` response.

`RREQ` (route request) asks for an automated `RRSP` response. Intermediate routers are
annotated in the message payload.

`C` (confirmation) asks for a confirmation message (with `CO` flag) to be sent back by
the destination.

`R` signals the packet was forwarded. This parameter is automatically added
and processed, and the user should not use it explicitly.

Predefined parameters available for any application:

`T=number` is an optional timestamp, as the UNIX timestamp (seconds since 1/1/1970
0:00 UTC) subtracted by 1552265462. If sub-second precision is required, the number
may have decimal places.

`H=chars` is an optional digital signature (HMAC) of the payload.

## Routing and forwarding

Currently, diffusion routing is the only implemented strategy.

By default, forwarding is OFF. To activate it, use the command `!repeater 1`
and restart the station. To deactivate, `!repeater 0`. Likewise the callsign, 
this setting is saved on NVRAM.

## Beacon interval

By default, the average interval of beacon packets is 10 minutes/600 seconds.
The fudge factor is 0.5, meaning the interval is randomly chosen between 5 and
15 minutes. The randomization avoids gratitous collisions when e.g. all stations
in the area are rebooted simultaneously after a blackout.

The first beacon packet is sent, by default and in average, 30 seconds after
startup. The fudge factor is 0.5 as well.

These intervals can be configured and are stored in NVRAM. Use the commands
`!beacon` and `!beacon1st` to query or set them. Note the values are expressed
in seconds.

## FEC code

Every packet is trailed by a 20-octet FEC (Forward Error Code).

Since Reed-Solomon codes demand a fixed-size message, it is calculated as if
the network packet was padded with nulls (binary zeros).

In order to contemplate low-memory microcontrollers, which cannot handle RS codes
above a certain size, two base sizes (and therefore two different RS codes) are
used: 100/80 and 200/180.

The reference FEC RS implementation is https://github.com/simonyipeter/Arduino-FEC .

## LoRa mode

Packets shall be transmitted using LoRa explicit mode, so the packet size is known
when it reaches the network layer to be parsed. CRC shall be disabled.

In our experiments, we found that LoRa packets arrive with errors even under
the best of circunstances. Using maximum CR is not enough to prevent this, and
LoRa CRC protection discards lots of almost-perfect packets. Software-level FEC
works much better.

## Encryption

Currently, LoRaMaDoR supports symmetric cryptography using a single pre-shared
key (configured via !cryptopsk command). This is implemented for non-amateur
uses like remote control of devices in private networks.

Encryption happens between packet encoding and insertion of FEC code. Encryption
packets are 16 octets longer than cleartext packets.

Commit message:

Shorter packets: RS-FEC redundancy proportional to packet size
Maximum net packet size increased to 200 octets (220 with FEC,
almost at 222 limit of LoRa).

Redundancy reduced to 10 octets for packets up to 50 octets,
and added a 'medium' level of redundancy of 14 octets for packets
up to 100 net octets.

PacketFormat.md, after:

# LoRaMaDoR protocol

This page describes the more technical details of the protocol.

## LoRaMaDoR packet format

A LoRaMaDoR packet is composed by three parts: header, payload and FEC code.
The header contains destination and source callsigns, as well as some 
parameters:

```
Destination<Source:Parameters Payload FEC
```

There shall not be spaces within the header. If there is a payload, it is separated
from the header by a single space. The FEC code is mandatory, and it is specified
in its own section later on.

Stations shall have 4 to 7 octets, shall not start with "Q", and may be suffixed
by an SSID. Special or pseudo-callsigns are: QB (beacon) for automatic broadcast
sent every 10 minutes, QR (beacon of repeater), QC (think "CQ") for human
broadcasting, and QL ("loopback") for debugging/testing.

Parameters are a set of comma-separated list of items, for example:

```
123,A,B=C,D,E=FGH
```

The parameters can be in three formats: naked number, naked key, and key=value.

There shall be one and only one naked number in the parameter list: it is the
packet ID. Together with the source callsign, it uniquely identifies the packet
within the network in a 20-minute time window. This is used to e.g. avoid 
forwarding the same packet twice.

Keys (naked or not) must be composed of capital letters and numbers only, and must start
with a letter. Values may be composed of any characters except those used as delimiters
in the header (space, comma, equal, etc.)

A value can be empty and this should be handled different from a naked key e.g.
in `A=,B`, B is naked while A has a value, which is an empty string. Implementations
should allow for this distinction.

Reserved parameters, added or handled by the core stack:

`PING` asks for an automated `PONG` response.

`RREQ` (route request) asks for an automated `RRSP` response. Intermediate routers are
annotated in the message payload.

`C` (confirmation) asks for a confirmation message (with `CO` flag) to be sent back by
the destination.

`R` signals the packet was forwarded. This parameter is automatically added
and processed, and the user should not use it explicitly.

Predefined parameters available for any application:

`T=number` is an optional timestamp, as the UNIX timestamp (seconds since 1/1/1970
0:00 UTC) subtracted by 1552265462. If sub-second precision is required, the number
may have decimal places.

`H=chars` is an optional digital signature (HMAC) of the payload.

## Routing and forwarding

Currently, diffusion routing is the only implemented strategy.

By default, forwarding is OFF. To activate it, use the command `!repeater 1`
and restart the station. To deactivate, `!repeater 0`. Likewise the callsign, 
this setting is saved on NVRAM.

## Beacon interval

By default, the average interval of beacon packets is 10 minutes/600 seconds.
The fudge factor is 0.5, meaning the interval is randomly chosen between 5 and
15 minutes. The randomization avoids gratitous collisions when e.g. all stations
in the area are rebooted simultaneously after a blackout.

The first beacon packet is sent, by default and in average, 30 seconds after
startup. The fudge factor is 0.5 as well.

These intervals can be configured and are stored in NVRAM. Use the commands
`!beacon` and `!beacon1st` to query or set them. Note the values are expressed
in seconds.

## FEC code

Every packet is trailed by a FEC (Forward Error Code). The code can be
Reed-Solomon RS(50,10), RS(100,14) or RS(200,20) depending on packet
size.

Since Reed-Solomon codes demand a fixed-size message, it is calculated as if
the network packet was padded with nulls (binary zeros) up to 50, 100 or 200
octets.

The idea of using several codes is to keep the redundancy and error correction
power roughly similar to all packet sizes, with a discreet advantage given to
shorter packets (< 100 octets).

The reference FEC RS implementation is https://github.com/simonyipeter/Arduino-FEC .

## LoRa mode

Packets shall be transmitted using LoRa explicit mode, so the packet size is known
when it reaches the network layer to be parsed. CRC shall be disabled.

In our experiments, we found that LoRa packets arrive with errors even under
the best of circunstances. Using maximum CR is not enough to prevent this, and
LoRa CRC protection discards lots of almost-perfect packets. Software-level FEC
works much better.

## Encryption

Currently, LoRaMaDoR supports symmetric cryptography using a single pre-shared
key (configured via !cryptopsk command). This is implemented for non-amateur
uses like remote control of devices in private networks.

Encryption happens between packet encoding and insertion of FEC code. Encryption
packets are 8 octets longer than cleartext packets.
